Add guidance for supplying usage files (#105)
microsoft/vcpkg-docs: vcpkg/maintainers/handling-usage-files.md

---

> title: Provide usage documentation for your packages
> description: Guidance for adding usage documentation to packages
> author: JavierMatosD
> ms.author: javiermat
> ms.date: 07/10/2023

Reviewer: ```suggestion
title: Provide usage documentation for your ports
description: Guidance for adding usage documentation to vcpkg ports
author: JavierMatosD
ms.author: javiermat
ms.date: 07/17/2023
ms.product: vcpkg
```

---

> # Provide usage documentation for your packages

Reviewer: ```suggestion
# Provide usage documentation for your ports
```

Author: We should discuss which of these terms we want to use in the title

## Overview

> Providing usage documentation for packages allows users to easily adopt them in their

Reviewer: ```suggestion
Providing usage documentation for ports allows users to easily adopt them in their
```

Author: I intentionally used the word "packages" here instead of "ports", since it is the package what you integrate in your project, not the port. 

From the original versioning spec, which I think we should make its own documentation article:

## Glossary
Some of the terms used in this document have similar meaning when discussed by the community, and because of that, they can cause confusion and ambiguity. To solve this issue, we will assign specific meaning to these terms and try to keep a consistent usage through the document.

**Library**: A piece of software (source code, binary files, documentation, license, etc.) that is intended to be reused by other software.

**Package**: A package can contain a library, a collection of libraries, build scripts, software tools, or other components necessary for its own use. The goal of vcpkg is to facilitate the installation of these packages in the user's environment.

**Port**: A vcpkg specific term, a port contains:

* Metadata about a package: package version, supported features, dependencies, etc.
* Instructions to acquire, build if necessary, and install the package.

> projects. We highly encourage providing a `usage` file within the ports directory (`ports/<port

Reviewer: ```suggestion
projects. We highly encourage providing a `usage` file within the `ports` directory (`ports/<port
```

Author: Sorry, I meant this:

```suggestion
projects. We highly encourage providing a `usage` file within the port's directory (`ports/<port
```

name>/usage`) that describes the minimal steps necessary to integrate with a build system.

### Supplying a usage file

> To provide usage documentation just put a text file named `usage` in the port's `share`

Reviewer: ```suggestion
To provide usage documentation create a text file named `usage` in the port's `share`
```

> To provide usage documentation just put a text file named `usage` in the port's `share`

Reviewer 2: I use code formatting to avoid machine translation. You can combine them if you wish, e.g. *`filename`*

installation directory. The recommended method is to call the `configure_file()` function in
`portfile.cmake`.

For example:

```cmake
configure_file("${CMAKE_CURRENT_LIST_DIR}/usage" "${CURRENT_PACKAGES_DIR}/share/${PORT}/usage" COPYONLY)
```

> After installing packages, vcpkg detects files installed to `${CURRENT_PACKAGES_DIR}/share/${PORT}/usage` and prints their usage instructions.

Reviewer: ```suggestion
After installing ports, vcpkg detects files installed to `${CURRENT_PACKAGES_DIR}/share/${PORT}/usage` and prints their usage instructions.
```

### Content format

> Provide clear instructions on how to use the package. The content should be concise, well-structured, and emphasize the minimum build system integration required to ensure the basic functionality of the library.

Reviewer: ```suggestion
Provide clear instructions on how to use the package. The content should be concise, well-structured, and emphasize the minimum build system integration required to use the library.
```

Reviewer: Suggested rewording for conciseness.

> It is important to focus on providing clear instructions that cover the essential aspects of using the package. The content should be concise, well-structured, and emphasize the minimum build system integration required to ensure the basic functionality of the library.

Reviewer: ```suggestion
Provide clear instructions on how to use the package. The content should be concise, well-structured, and emphasize the minimum build system integration required to ensure the basic functionality of the library.
```

> Be clear and concise about how to utilize the package effectively. Avoid overwhelming users with code snippets, command-line instructions, or configuration details. Instead, use the [`"documentation"` property in the port's `vcpkg.json` file](../users/manifests.md) so users can learn more about the specifics of your library.

Reviewer: ```suggestion
Be clear and concise about how to utilize the package effectively. Avoid overwhelming users with code snippets, command-line instructions, or configuration details. Instead, use the [`"documentation"` property in the port's `vcpkg.json` file](../users/manifests.md) so users can learn more about your library.
```

> Use the following templates as a pattern for your usage files:

Reviewer: ```suggestion
Use the following templates as a pattern for your `usage` files:
```

> Prioritize clarity and conciseness in explaining the fundamental steps to utilize the package effectively. Avoid overwhelming users with code snippets, command-line instructions, or configuration details. Instead, use the [`"documentation"` property in the port's `vcpkg.json` file](../users/manifests.md) so users can learn more about the specifics of your library.

Reviewer: ```suggestion
Be clear and concise about how to utilize the package effectively. Avoid overwhelming users with code snippets, command-line instructions, or configuration details. Instead, use the [`"documentation"` property in the port's `vcpkg.json` file](../users/manifests.md) so users can learn more about the specifics of your library.
```

Packages with CMake targets:

```text
<port> provides CMake targets:

    <instructions>
```

> Header-only packages:

Reviewer: ```suggestion
Header-only libraries:
```

>     <instructions>

Reviewer: Since the goal here is to provide templates to give users a starting point, should example instructions be included?

Author: Template example added below

---

> title: Supplying usage for ports

Reviewer 2: What does Supplying usage for ports mean? As I read the article, it seems like a more appropriate title is something like "Provide usage documentation for ports"

description: Guidance for handling usage files.
author: JavierMatosD
ms.author: javiermat
ms.date: 06/30/2023
---
# Suppyling usage for ports

## Overview

> Providing usage documentation for ports allows users to easily adopt them in their

Reviewer 2: Would it be useful to say what a port even is as way of introduction? The article assumes that you know what they are. Maybe they do know, but maybe they don't.

Author: "Port" is what we call the set of scripts and metadata that vcpkg uses to install a package/library. At a minimum, a port is a directory containing a `porfile.cmake` script and a `vcpkg.json` metadata file, but it can also contain patch files, other helper scripts and/or the usage file. We assume that users are familiar with the term since we use it extensively in the rest of the documentation, but we don't have an article defining what "port" means (perhaps we should create one?).

Reviewer 2: We should note a task to create a glossary topic that defines things like a port. But since that's not the purpose of this doc, maybe we could shorthand it with something like: "Providing usage documentation for ports (the collection of scripts and metadata vcpkg uses to install a package/library) allows users...

projects. We highly encourage providing a `usage` file within the ports directory (`ports/<port
name>/usage`) that describes the minimal steps necessary to integrate with a buildsystem.

### Supplying a usage file

> To provide usage documentation put a `usage` text file in the port's `share`

Reviewer 2: What's a usage text file - a file named usage?

Author: Indeed, probably should rewrite to "put a text file named `usage` ..."

> installation directory. The recommended approach is to call the `configure_file()` function in

Reviewer 2: approach to what? To adding the usage file to the installation directory? If so, it'd be good to call it out, e.g. "To add a `usage` file to the port's `share` installation directory, call the `configure_file()` function..."  Will they know how to do that?

`portfile.cmake`.

For example:

```cmake
configure_file("${CMAKE_CURRENT_LIST_DIR}/usage" "${CURRENT_PACKAGES_DIR}/share/${PORT}/usage" COPYONLY)
```

This installs `${CURRENT_PACKAGES_DIR}/share/${PORT}/usage` which vcpkg will use to print usage
instructions for the port whenever it gets installed.

### Content format

> When structuring the content of the usage files, it is important to focus on providing clear instructions that cover the essential aspects of using the package. The content should be concise, well-structured, and emphasize the minimum build system integration required to ensure the basic functionality of the library.

Reviewer 2: You could lose the whole intro to that sentence, e.g. "It's important to focus on clear instructions that cover how to use the package"

> While it can be tempting to include extensive code snippets, command-line instructions, or configuration details, it is advisable to avoid overwhelming users with excessive information. Instead, prioritize clarity and conciseness in explaining the fundamental steps to utilize the package effectively.

Reviewer 2: Wordiness police - if we are telling you to do something then by definition it's advisable. Instead of "it is advisable to avoid", just say "Avoid overwhelming users with ..."

> For comprehensive and detailed information, users can refer to the package's [documentation](../users/manifests.md).

Reviewer 2: Comprehensive and detailed are two ways of saying the same thing. Rather than "users can refer to" consider this way: "For more information about writing usage files, see [Manifests](../users/manifests.md)  (put the real title in the brackets of that article)

Author: This needs a rewrite, what we are trying to tell port authors is to populate the "documentation" metadata so that users of their port can refer for more detailed instructions.

> Usage files should follow a pattern similar to the following templates:

Reviewer 2: Sounds passive voice-ish. Perhaps: "Use the following templates as a pattern for your usage files:"

Author: Thanks for the suggestion, sounds so much better!
